---
title: Contact Manager App
---

**[Code](https://github.com/TroyNech/contactor)**

[Skip to the demo video](#demo)

## Description

The project is a mobile app for managing contacts. It is designed for use in group settings like networking events where people want to exchange contact information. The app can display a QR code containing users’ contact information, which other users scan using the app. Scanned QR codes are then decoded to get the contact information, and then the contact is added to the scanning user’s contact list. This app provides superior functionality over other methods in group situations because people are able to exchange contact information with a minimal amount of steps. A person just needs to display their QR code until everyone has scanned it, then press the Scan button to scan the codes of everyone else as they take turns displaying QR codes. There is no need to go through menus and prompts like there is for Wi-Fi Direct and similar methods. It is also cross-platform, unlike Android Beam and NFC.

## Design

The app was built using the Ionic 4 framework. Ionic allows developers to create a single project that can run on multiple platforms, including iOS and Android, using web technologies. Ionic 4 provides a front-end framework that reduces the amount of work developers need to do by having readymade components and styling. The main programming language of Ionic is JavaScript. The Angular JavaScript framework was used as it is recommended for Ionic 4. Angular allows for the creation of single page apps and follows an MVC architecture. It is especially useful because it provides dependency injection, templates, lots of useful library functions and it takes care of modifying the DOM by itself.

Google’s Firebase web and application development service was used to provide critical functionality for the app. Firebase allows developers to create serverless applications by providing server functionality that is accessible through APIs. This app uses Firebase Authentication and Firestore, both of which are free at low levels of usage. Firebase Authentication takes care of the authenticating users. Given an email and a password, it can create an account or tell if it is a valid login. Password reset emails are also sent using Firebase Authentication. Firebase Firestore is a NoSQL database that stores data in a key-value format similar to JSON. One of its crucial features is that it syncs data immediately and will track updates while devices are offline, syncing with the server once the device becomes connected. It also caches data so requests will use local data while the device is offline. Firestore was used to store of the users’ account information.

## Lessons Learned

Many valuable lessons were learned during this project. This was my first mobile application and the most JavaScript programming I’ve ever done. This is also the project (outside of work) where I’ve used the most 3rd party software. The general lessons learned are as follows:
•	Programming standards are useful even on one-person projects. I purposefully neglected following a standard because I wanted to try out the various ways of doing stuff in Angular/TypeScript (Angular uses the TypeScript JavaScript extension), but this led to instances where I got confused because a piece of code that worked in one location didn’t work in another because the locations used different styles, and although the styles are commonly referred to as interchangeable, there are in fact subtle differences that resulted in hours of debugging. Not having a coding style is also problematic because now I have to clean up the code or put a notice on my GitHub page explaining it if I want to show it off to employers
•	Plan out your file structure in detail beforehand. I researched Ionic file structures before I started coding, but I ended up choosing one that resulted in cluttered directories because I did not plan out what files I would be creating (which I would have had a good idea about at that point)
•	Plan out the blueprint of the code before you get too far in programming, even the HTML. Since I decided early on that I didn’t need classes, I figured that I didn’t need to do any diagrams of my project structure. That was a mistake. I am used to doing to object-oriented back-end programming, where most of the relationships are between classes. But in Angular there are a lot of relationships between things called components, which are units containing JavaScript, CSS, and HTML. These components are designed for reuse, in much the same way that classes are used in OOP. Because I didn’t pick up on this I ended up spending hours refactoring components so that I could use them in multiple locations (of course, I could have saved this time by just copying and pasting code and making easy modifications, but I already had no programming style and didn’t want to make things worse)
•	Do not underestimate the speed and diversity of front-end development. By this I mean don’t expect the same level of maturity for front-end technology as there exists for back-end technology like Java. There were some difficulties I ran into with Ionic, Cordova (Ionic uses Cordova to build packages for targeted platforms), and Android that either were known bugs or not reported at all. This despite the fact that Ionic 4 was in beta for years and had been released into production by the time I started using it. Additionally, many plugins for Ionic/Cordova that were recommended online as little as a year ago were already out of date and/or abandoned, including some plugins required by Google to use Google account login with their authentication service with Ionic (I was not able to build the project with these plugins and had to give up on that functionality, even though the guide was written less than a year ago!)
•	If no one uses something, you should probably not use it. p2pkit is a plugin I tried that provides for communication between two devices using Wi-Fi. It also detects the distance between two devices running it. I thought this would be a good technology to use for transferring contacts, but I couldn’t get it to work properly. I was suspicious that no one else on the internet talked about it, like just a few hits from the last few years, but they had some cool demoes and they responded to emails so I was hoping that I could get lucky. Unfortunately, I ended dumping 12-14 hours into it and couldn’t get it working properly, and they never responded to my GitHub issue (the open issues from 2016 should have warned me away as well).

I am glad that I made the mistakes that I did because I learned a lot, but, in addition to the above lessons, if I had to do it over again I would not spend any time on trying to get Google account login to work. It was clear after a few hours that it would not be easy to do in Ionic 4, but I dumped 11-15 hours into it because I thought it would be cool (plus I got frustrated at the fact that it wasn’t working). It ended up not being ready for the project deadline, so it was kind of a waste of time. I also would not waste the approximately 14 hours I spent planning to use NFC for the contact transfer before I realized that NFC writing functionality is only unlocked for Android, not iOS. The confusion came from the fact that the page for the Ionic NFC plugin buried the fact that it was cross-platform only to the extent of reading. 

## Demo

<video controls>
  <source src="demo.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>